# Research

\toc

## Post-doctoral research at CIMNE (2016-present)

### Objectives

This part of my research career starts in January 2016 and it extends up
to the present. I joined CIMNE as a post-doc researcher in 2016 and I
was promoted to Assistant Research Professor in view of my academic
results in 2019. In CIMNE, I am pursuing a research agenda, whose main
objectives are:

> -   Developing novel parallel finite element (FE) techniques for the simulation of complex problems in science an engineering using modern supercomputers
> -   Helping application experts to adopt these novel computational techniques to solve real-world problems
> -   Implementing these computer tools in open-source software projects in order to foster their adoption by the scientific community

### Research lines

In order to address these global objectives, my current research agenda
includes the following main research lines:

-  **RL1:** Simplify mesh generation in large-scale parallel computations via
    embedded FE methods

-  **RL2:** Software design of scientific applications and open-source codes
    (the Gridap.jl project)

#### RL1: Simplify mesh generation in large-scale parallel computations via embedded FE methods

##### Research line description

Mesh generation is known to be one of the main bottlenecks in real-world
industrial FE simulations. Conventional FE methods require so-called
body-fitted meshes, i.e., grids that conform to the geometrical
boundaries of the computational domain (see Figure 1). Constructing such grids is not
obvious for complex geometries. It often requires skilled humans, and it
is time consuming as mesh generation is estimated to be 80% of total
simulation time in industrial applications [^cottrell_2009]. The goal of
so-called embedded FE methods [^burman_2015] (also known as unfitted or
immersed methods) is to change this situation by allowing one to work on
background Cartesian meshes that do not necessarily conform to the
geometrical boundaries (see Figure 1). Generating such unfitted Cartesian
grids is much simpler and more efficient that constructing body fitted
meshes, specially in large parallel computations. One can use highly
scalable octree-based mesh generators like the p4est package, which has
shown excellent scaling properties up to thousands of hundreds of CPU
cores.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig1.png)

*Figure 1: Body-fitted vs. unfitted meshes*
@@

However, embedded methods have known drawbacks. One of the most
notorious, still an open question today, is the so-called *small cut
cell problem*. Some cells of the unfitted mesh can be intersected by a
very small part of the domain, which can lead to arbitrarily large
condition numbers in the underlying discrete FE operators. This is a
major issue, when dealing with large-scale simulations that require
Krylov sub-space iterative linear solvers because they are very
sensitive to the conditioning and spectral properties of the underlying
operators. The result is that embedded methods are mainly used in small
to medium problems, which can be handled with direct linear solvers
(i.e., Gaussian elimination) instead of iterative procedures. One of my
main research goals at CIMNE is to address the conditioning problems of
embedded methods in order to allow their usage in large-scale real-world
computations.

##### Funding

This research line has several funding sources. On the one hand, I was
awarded with a Beatriu Pin√≥s fellowship (a competitive post-doc grant
issued by the Catalan autonomous government) to develop embedded FE
methods for the simulation of additive manufacturing processes. With the
help of this grand I was able to develop new numerical techniques and
mentor a PhD student in order to adopt these new tools in his additive
manufacturing simulations. This work is also framed in the H2020 project
"EMUSIC", which also focuses in the same application. This research
line on embedded methods has also been supported by the H2020 project
"ExaQUte". In particular, I am contributor in the work package "WP1
Embedded methods", where I have lead the research associated with task
"Task 1.6: Development of robust (and scalable) linear solvers for the
embedded case". Another funding source is the Spanish project
"SOFAST". I am involved in the works packages "WP1 Embedded methods"
and "WP2 Adaptive mesh refinement". In the frame of these projects, I
am currently supervising a PhD student at UPC, who is developing novel
techniques to couple CAD models and embedded simulations.

##### Results

This research line has lead to several major research results detailed
as follows.

###### Multi-level domain decomposition for embedded finite element methods

In FE analysis, the current way to solve linear systems at large-scales
is using iterative Krylov sub-space methods in combination with parallel
and scalable preconditioners. Unfortunately, existing preconditioners
like algebraic multigrid (AMG) [^briggs_2000] or multi-level domain
decomposition [^toselli_2005] are mainly designed for body-fitted meshes
and cannot readily deal with the ill-conditioning associated with small
cut cells.

Specific precontinoners for unfitted methods have been proposed in the
literature in different contexts, but they are mainly serial
non-scalable algorithms. This has motivated me to develop novel
techniques in order to enable the usage of embedded method in much
larger computations. As a first approach, I have considered BDDC
preconditioners to solve such problems at large scales. This choice is
motivated by the fact that BDDC methods are among the most scalable
preconditioners for FE analysis. In particular, the BDDC methods
implemented in FEMPAR have shown an excellent weak scaling up to 458,752
cores and 30 billion unknowns [^badia_2016]. Unfortunately, conventional
BDDC preconditioners loose they optimal qualities, when the underlying
problem is discretized with an unfitted grid. Thus, available BDDC
solvers cannot be considered in combination with embedded FE methods.

In order to revert this unfavorable situation, I have introduced a novel
BDDC method specifically tailored to deal with embedded grids. The
proposed method is based on a modification of the coarse space of the
BDDC solver, which makes it robust with respect to badly cut cells. The
method has been shown to be algorithmically weak scalable for a wide
range of 3D complex geometries. That is, the number of iterations needed
to reach convergence in the preconditioned linear solver is
asymptotically independent of the problem size (see Figure 2). This work has motivated the
publication of 1 paper in a Q1 ranked journal (see reference
[^badia_2017]), and has been presented in several conferences both at
national and international level.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig2.png)

*Figure 2: BDDC for embedded methods in a weak scaling test for a Poisson problem
on different complex 3D geometries. A perfect weak scaling of the linear
solver iterations is
obtained.*
@@

###### The aggregated unfitted finite element method (AgFEM)

Most of the works enabling the usage of iterative linear solver in
combination with embedded FE methods consider tailored preconditioners
in order to deal with matrices affected by the small cut cell problem
(e.g., the BDDC method for embedded grids previously presented).
The main drawback of this approach is that
one relies on highly customized solvers, and therefore, it is not
possible to take advantage of well known and established linear solvers
for FE analysis available in renowned scientific computing packages as
Trilinos or PETSc. In order to address this issue, I have considered a
second approach. I have developed an enhanced FE formulation that leads
to linear systems, whose condition number is not affected by small cuts
(see Figure 3). Therefore, they can be solved with standard
linear solvers such as the AMG methods available in Trilinos or PETSc.

The enhanced FE formulation is called the aggregated unfitted finite
element method (AgFEM), which is based on removal of shape functions
associated with badly cut cells by introducing carefully designed
constraints. The formulation of AgFEM shares the good properties of
body-fitted FE methods such as stability, condition number bounds,
optimal convergence, and continuity with respect to data. In contrast to
previous works like CutFEM [^burman_2015], it is easy to implement and
to use in different problem types since it does not require to compute
high order derivatives of the shape functions, and it does not introduce
extra dissipation terms in the weak form. AgFEM has already been
successfully applied to the solution of fluid [^badia_2018b] and heat
transfer problems [^badia_2018a]. This work has lead to 2 publications
in Q1 journals and several conference contributions at national and
international level. Find in Figure 4 a flow simulation using the AgFEM
method.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig3.png)

*Figure 3: Poisson problem defined on a moving domain. Note that the standard
embedded formulation leads to very high condition numbers, which are
very sensitive to the relative position between the computational domain
and the background mesh, specially for second order interpolations
($p=2$). In contrast, the condition number is much lower for the
enhanced formulation (the AgFEM method) and it is nearly independent of
the position of the domain.*
@@

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig4.png)

*Figure 4: Numerical solution of a (dimensionless) Stokes problem using the AgFEM
method (streamlines colored by velocity magnitude and pressure). This
computation is carried out without constructing an unstructured
body-fitted mesh thanks to the application of the AgFEM
method.*
@@

###### Extension of AgFEM to large-scale parallel computations.

I have implemented a distributed-memory version of AgFEM in the FEMPAR
software project making use of MPI for inter-processor communications.
The obtained results confirmed my expectations. When using AgFEM, the
resulting systems of linear algebraic equations can be effectively
solved using standard AMG preconditioners. In this case, I have
considered the AMG methods available in the GAMG module of the PETSc
library. With the parallel AgFEM, I was able to run weak scaling tests
up to 300M degrees of freedom (DOFs) and 16K processors in the
Marenostrum-IV platform. The results show that the optimal behavior of
AMG solvers for body-fitted meshes is also recovered for AgFEM, i.e.
number of linear solver iterations asymptotically independent of problem
size. To my best knowledge, this is the first time that embedded methods
are successfully applied to such large scales. These results have been
published in a Q1 international journal (see reference [^verdugo_2019]).

###### Extension of AgFEM to adaptive computations.

Parallel implementations and scalable solvers are essential to
dramatically reduce the computation times of challenging simulations,
but not sufficient in many contexts. Several problems of interest are
multi-scale in nature and, thus, require different mesh resolution in
different spatial locations. In this context, trying to capture the
finest scales with uniform meshes in overkill and the usage of adaptive
mesh refinement becomes mandatory.

Parallel mesh adaptation is a challenging operation since mesh partition
and load balance needs to be carefully realized to achieve performance.
In large parallel computations, Cartesian grids locally adapted with
forest-of-trees (also known as octree meshes) are among the few ways to
locally adapt in a scalable way. They leverage so-called *space-filing
curves* to reduce the mesh partition and load balance to a 1d problem
that can be solved very efficiently. However, the main drawback of this
approach is that the resulting computational grid contains so-called
*hanging nodes*, which require extra work when defining conforming FE
interpolations. If certain conditions are not satisfied, the constraints
introduced by hanging nodes may expand beyond a single layer of ghost
cells, thus leading to an incorrect parallel FE solver. Unfortunately,
the current literature fails to explain under which conditions this
happens for generic conforming FE discretizations (i.e., not only
limited to Lagrangian elements). To address this situation, I have
studied the correctness of a number of algorithms and parallel data
structures needed to build conforming FE discretizations on octree
meshes partitioned via space-filling curves. The proposed algorithms and
data structures have been implemented within the FEMPAR scientific
software library, using p4est as the forest-of-trees back-end. A strong
scaling study reveals remarkable scalability up to 32.2K CPU cores and
482.2M DOFs. This work has been recently published in the Q1 journal
"SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing" (see reference [^badia_2019a] ).

In a second step, I have combined the parallel AgFEM implementation
previously developed with this adaptive FE framework. The result is a
novel scalable distributed-memory version of AgFEM on locally-adapted
Cartesian meshes. The main novelty of the method is a two-step algorithm
that carefully mixes AgFEM constraints, which get rid of the small cut
cell problem, and standard hanging node constraints, which ensure trace
continuity. This method requires minimum parallelization effort since it
can leverage standard functionality available in existing large-scale FE
codes. Numerical experiments demonstrate its optimal mesh adaptation
capability, robustness to cut location and parallel efficiency, on
classical Poisson hp-adaptivity benchmarks. This work opens the path to
functional and geometrical error-driven dynamic mesh adaptation with the
AgFEM method in large-scale realistic scenarios. A research paper
detailing this work is published in [^badia_2021]).

###### Embedded finite element methods for 3D printing simulations

One the main driving applications of my research on embedded FE methods
has been the simulation of additive manufacturing processes using
advanced large-scale FEs. This is the main topic of my Beatriu Pin√≥s
fellowship and the EU H2020 project "EMUSIC", were I have participated
as researcher. Additive manufacturing (also known as 3D printing) is an
advanced manufacturing method used to build physical objects directly
from 3D computer designs by the superposition of thin layers of
materials such as metals, polymers or composites. 3D printers have been
described in numerous occasions as a revolutionary technology with the
potential to radically transform the manufacturing industry. However,
high-energy sources used to melt metal powders during the printing
process induce thermo-mechanical shape distortions and residual
stresses, that deteriorate the geometrical quality and the requested
material properties. Currently, the standard industrial practice to
optimize the printing process in order to obtain quality components is
through experimental testing, which is expensive and time consuming
since it requires the production of hundreds of prototypes before
reaching the final piece. Fortunately, predictive computer simulations
can potentially be used to validate the process parameters before
printing the component. However, current simulation software still has
important limitations when it comes to predict shape distortions and
residual stresses in complex settings with an acceptable level of
accuracy and an acceptable time frame.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig6.png)

*Figure 5: Snapshots of a thermal 3D printing simulation using the AgFEM method
in order to effectively represent the geometry of the growing
piece.*
@@

I have contributed to develop novel computational tools able to provide
much faster and accurate results. In particular, generating
computational meshes for additive manufacturing simulations is
particularly challenging and time consuming. The shape of the 3D printed
object grows in time, layer-by-layer, as it is produced. Capturing the
growing shape requires a different mesh for each time step to represent
the portion of the piece that has been produced so far. It is obvious
that generating thousands of independent meshes with conventional
methods is virtually impossible. Thus, embedded methods are well suited
in this context. I have applied the AgFEM method to additive
manufacturing simulations in collaboration with a PhD student of my
research team (see Figure 5).

##### Current and future work

I plan to continue working on my current research line on large-scale FE
solvers and embedded methods and its application to challenging
engineering problems. I will extend these techniques to more challenging
problem types and collaborate with application experts in order to
simulate relevant real-world cases.

#### RL2: Software design of scientific applications and open-source projects

##### Research line description

I have recently started a new research line whose goal is to develop a
new generation of open-source FE codes. The development of
high-performance scientific software for the numerical approximation of
PDEs is a key research area with a broad impact in advanced scientific
and engineering applications. Existing partial differential equation
(PDE) solvers like FE codes are usually written in compiled programming
languages introduced several decades ago, mainly C/C++ and Fortran
95/03/08. These languages are considered for performance reasons, but
they are also related to poor code productivity. In contrast,
interpreted languages like Python or MATLAB allow one to write scripts
and applications in much less lines of code, boosting code productivity,
but they lead to much slower programs. A trade-off between performance
and productivity is usually achieved in scientific software libraries
like FEniCS by combining an efficient C/C++ computational back-end with
a user-friendly high-level Python user front-end. However, this approach
is not satisfactory, when researchers need to extend these libraries
with new features since they are forced to learn and modify a complex
C/C++ back-end instead of benefiting from the productivity expected from
the Python front-end. This problem is referred to as the *two-language
problem*.


Fortunately, recent advances in compiler technology are starting to
revert this situation. In the field of scientific computing, Julia is a
new computer language that combines the performance of compiled
languages with the productivity of interpreted ones by using recent
advances in compiler technology like type inference and just-in-time
compilation. As a result, the same language can be used both for the
back-end and the front-end, thus eliminating the two-language problem.
Based on this novel paradigm, I have started the Gridap.jl project
[^badia_2020], a new generation, open-source, FE framework completely
written in the Julia programming language. Gridap.jl allows users to
write FE applications in a notation almost one-to-one to the
mathematical notation used to define the PDE weak form. For instance,
see, in Figure 6, how a Poisson equation on a complex 3D
domain can be solved in Gridap.jl with few lines of code. To my best
knowledge, only libraries like FEniCS are able to achieve such compact
user interfaces, but they are based on sophisticated compilers of
variational forms, which generate, compile and link a specialized C++
back-end for the problem at hand. One of the limitations of this
approach is that form compilers are rigid systems, not designed to be
extended by average users. In contrast, Gridap.jl is based on a much
simpler approach. It leverages the Julia just-in-time compiler to
generate efficient problem-specific code without the need to maintain a
custom compiler of variational forms.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig11.png)

*Figure 6: User code to solve a 3D Poisson equation in Gridap.jl and view of the
corresponding numerical solution. Note that the bilinear and linear
forms of the problem, `a` and `l`, are specified with a syntax closely
related to their mathematical notation thanks to an advanced software
design based on the Julia computer language.*
@@

##### Funding

Gridap.jl appears as one of the two PDE codes selected to implement new
novel FE methods in a "Discovery Project" of the Australian Research
Council (ref: DP210103092, \$475000) co-lead by my collaborator at
Monash University Prof. Santiago Badia. In the framework of this
project, new collaborators are expected to joint and contribute in the
expansion of the project. In addition, Gridap.jl has been accepted as a
[NumFOCUS](https://numfocus.org) affiliated project. The mission of
NumFOCUS is to promote open practices in research, data, and scientific
computing by serving as a fiscal sponsor for open source projects and
organizing community-driven educational programs. Being an affiliated
project, Gridap.jl is eligible to participate in NumFOCUS funding
schemes and other events like the participation in the [Google Summer of
Code](https://g.co/gsoc/) under the NumFOCUS umbrella.

##### Results

###### Initial release of the open-source finite element project Gridap.jl

The first immediate result in this research line is the initial release
of the project, whose source code is freely available at [github](https://github.com/gridap/Gridap.jl)
under a MIT software license. In
addition, a related article has been published in the "Journal of Open
Scientific Software" (see reference [^badia_2020]). Gridap.jl is
already a fully functional general-purpose FE library ready to solve
linear, non-linear, steady-state, and time-dependent PDEs. It already
provides different types of conforming FE methods like nodal Lagrangian
elements for grad-conforming approximations (e.g., for linear elasticity
or thermal analysis) or non-nodal interpolations like Raviart-Thomas for
div-conforming approximations (e.g., for flow in porous media).
Discontinuous Galerkin schemes are also supported. Gridap.jl is
currently used by several research groups worldwide in institutions such
as Monash University, MIT, TU Delft, UPC, and CIMNE. A set of
introductory [tutorials](https://github.com/gridap/Tutorials)
to the library is available
 and a [Gitter chat](https://gitter.im/Gridap-jl/community) to ask questions
and interact with the Gridap.jl community.

###### GridapEmbedded.jl: a Gridap.jl plugging providing embedded finite element methods

The Gridap.jl project is designed to be an extensible package ecosystem
with several plugins that extend the functionality of the core
repository. In particular, [GridapEmbedded.jl](https://github.com/gridap/GridapEmbedded.jl) is an extension that
implements embedded FE methods. At this moment, it provides embedded
methods based on classical ghost-penalty or methods based on AgFEM.
GridapEmmbedded.jl will be the basis to implement the new space-time
methods since it is implemented in a dimension-implemented fashion
allowing to consider 4D meshes in the future.

##### Current and Future work

###### GridapDistributed.jl: a Gridap.jl plugging for parallel distributed computations.

At this moment, Gridap.jl provides mainly serial algorithms and needs to
be extended to parallel computations in order to cope with large-scale
realistic simulations. To this end, I have started the plugin
[GridapDistributed.jl](https://github.com/gridap/GridapDistributed.jl),
whose goal is to provide the parallel functionality needed in parallel
distributed-memory computations. I am designing a set of extensible
distributed data structures that allow one to implement parallel
algorithms in a generic way independent on the parallel computing
environment (e.g., MPI or the Julia build-in distributed mode) used to
run the computations. This is specially handy for developing new code
since it allows one to debug parallel algorithms by running an emulated
distributed computation in a standard (sequential) Julia session and
using standard serial debuggers. Once the code works with the emulated
parallel mode, it can be automatically deployed in a supercomputer via
an MPI back-end implemented for this purpose. Thus, the package provides
a very convenient way of developing parallel algorithms, while achieving
the performance of MPI-based applications. This will help to develop new
parallel FE methods in a very effective way. In particular, PhD students
not necessarily experts in the MPI library can benefit from this
framework to develop their parallel algorithms. At this moment, I have
been able to solve the Poisson equation with up to 1B cells on 16K
processors with GridapDistributed.jl on Gadi (an Australian
super-computer) and I expect to further mature and extend the
capabilities of this library.

###### Leveraging the Gridap.jl ecosystem to solve problems in science and engineering.

Several researchers have already realized the potential benefits of
using the Gridap.jl framework for their applications and have asked to
me for collaboration. My plan is to keep growing a network of scientific
collaborators that use the library in several contexts, in order to
increase my changes of publishing more research papers and to find
relevant topics for preparing project proposals.

## Post-doctoral research at TUM (2013-2015)

In this post-doc stay, I have developed parallel AMG solvers for the
solution of large systems of linear algebraic equations associated with
the FE discretization of complex multi-physics problems. The main goal
of this research was to provide a general framework able to be applied
to several problem types. In particular, this work was applied to
fluid-structure interaction (FSI), thermo-mechanical coupling, and human
respiratory mechanics among others.

### General framework for the solution of coupled problems with monolithic schemes

The numerical simulation of coupled problems via discretization
techniques such as the FE method requires special solution strategies
for solving the coupling between the underlying physical fields. The
so-called partitioned methods [^felippa_2001] are often the preferred
choice in industrial applications because they allow to reuse existing
(black-box) solvers for the individual fields. However, this approach is
unstable for many challenging strongly coupled problems [^forster_2007]
and, therefore, another family of methods called monolithic are required
in a variety of complex settings. It has also been shown that monolithic
schemes are often preferable in terms of efficiency as compared to
partitioned ones. For that reason, this approach has been the preferred
option for solving many strongly coupled problems in the literature.
However, the price to be paid for the extra robustness of monolithic
methods is a more challenging system of linear equations. The system
matrix is a big sparse matrix with a special block structure
representing each of the underlying physical fields and frequently has a
very bad condition number. In real-world applications, iterative methods
such as GMRES are used to attack this linear system, which requires
efficient preconditioners for addressing the bad conditioning of the
problem. Selecting a suitable preconditioner is the key point in the
solution process.

The standard approach to design preconditioners for coupled problems is
to use approximated block inverses in order to untangle the coupling
between the physical fields, and then, to use efficient AMG solvers for
the resulting uncoupled problems. The drawback of these methods is that
the coupling is resolved only at the finest grid level. Thus, using
efficient AMG solvers for the underlying problems does not necessarily
imply a good treatment of the coupling and a fast global solution. This
drawback is overcome by Gee et al. [^gee_2011], who propose an enhanced
block preconditioner (referred to as monolithic AMG) for FSI
applications, which enforces the coupling at all grid levels, and often
results in a better solver performance. Monolithic AMG preconditioners
are a promising approach for other coupled problems as well but, this
strategy was only applied to FSI. In order to allow the usage of this
enhanced AMG methods for a wide range of problem types, I have developed
an general computational framework based on monolithic AMG techniques.
For comparison purposes, conventional AMG solvers were also included.
The method was implemented in the high performance multi-physics code
BACI and it was published in a Q1 journal (see reference
[^verdugo_2016]). This framework has been used at TUM since then, and it
has been considered by several papers in top international journals
(see, e.g., [^kremheller_2018][^fang_2018]), with a wide range of
applications including simulation of vascular tumor growth and
simulations of lithium ion cells.

### Solvers for the thermo-mechanical coupling in rocket nozzles

In the framework of the German research project "Fundamental
Technologies for the Development of Future Space-Transport-System
Components under High Thermal and Mechanical Loads", I have applied the
general linear solver framework to the simulation of the
thermo-mechanical coupling in rocket nozzles. I exemplary show here the
performance of the developed preconditioners. The nozzle geometry (see
Figures 7 and 8) and other problem parameters are
inspired by the "Vulcain" rocket engine installed in the Ariane space
launcher, see [^verdugo_2016] for further details.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig12.png)

*Figure 7: Rocket nozzle example: Full geometry of the nozzle (left),
computational domain including one cooling channel (center), and generic
cross section of the computational domain with the applied
thermo-mechanical loads (right)*
@@

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig13.png)

*Figure 8: Rocket nozzle example: Deformation of the nozzle (left), temperature
distribution (center) and original and deformed longitudinal section
(right). The results are given at time $t=1$ s and the deformation is
magnified 20 times.*
@@

After the usual space and time discretization, the simulation results
into a non-linear problem to be solved at each time step, which is
handled with a monolithic Newton scheme. At each Newton iteration, the
associated monolithic linear system of equations is solved with a GMRES
method preconditioned with four different solvers available in our
computational framework. The first method, namely BGS(AMG), considers an
outer block Gauss-Seidel (BGS) scheme for uncoupling the fields and then
independent AMG solvers are used to handle the thermal and mechanical
problems separately. The second method, namely SIMPLE(AMG), is a similar
method that considers an idea based on the SIMPLE method [^elman_2008]
for uncoupling the fields instead of BGS. The third method, namely
AMG(BGS), is an extension of the monolithic AMG solver to a generic
coupled problem. Finally, the fourth method, namely BGS(DD), is an outer
BGS for uncoupling the fields and then standard single-level additive
Schwartz preconditioners are used to attack the uncoupled problems. The
fourth method is one of the most simple parallel preconditioners that
can be considered in such a problem, and therefore, it is considered
here as a reference. All this solvers could be built easily by means of
parameter lists using the general preconditioning framework.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig14.png)

*Figure 9: Rocket nozzle example: Results of the weak scalability study. The CPU
times include the setup costs of the
preconditioner.*
@@

The performance of the preconditioners is studied with a weak
scalability test, see Figure 9. In this experiment, the ratio
between processors and DOFs is kept constant with a value about 12500
DOF/processor. The multi-grid methods AMG(BGS), BGS(AMG) and SIMPLE(AMG)
have a very good scalability as the iteration count and CPU time of the
linear solver increase only mildly with the problem size. On the other
hand, the single-level method BGS(DD) is not scalable since the solver
time strongly grows as the problem size increases. The performance of
the single-level method BGS(DD) is particularly poor in this complex
example which demonstrates that multi-grid preconditioners such as
AMG(BGS), BGS(AMG) and SIMPLE(AMG) are required in this challenging
setting. In conclusion, the AMG solvers implemented in our generic
computational framework were able to solve this complex example
efficiently.

### Efficient solvers for respiratory mechanics

Another application of the general linear solver framework has been the
simulation of human respiratory mechanics. In recent years, advances
have been made towards more protective ventilation strategies
[^tobin_2001] trying to minimize negative side effects of the treatment,
but it is still not fully clear what is the best ventilation strategy
for a specific patient. Advanced modeling and simulation offer the
possibility of predicting the mechanical response of the respiratory
system under different ventilation scenarios, and give an opportunity to
design better patient-tailored treatments. However, simulating the human
lung poses several computational challenges including large and multiply
coupled systems of linear equations. Thus, the underlying motivation of
this work is to enable the efficient simulation of virtual lung models
on high-performance computing platforms in order to assess mechanical
ventilation strategies and contributing to design more protective
patient-specific ventilation treatments.

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig15.png)

*Figure 10: Patient-specific lung example: Numerical solution of the lung model
consisting of the structural displacement (left), fluid pressure
(center) and fluid velocity (right) at time $t=0.75$
s.*
@@

The system of linear equations to be solved in this application is
essentially the monolithic system arising in FSI extended by additional
algebraic constraints. The introduction of these constraints leads to a
saddle point problem that cannot be solved with usual FSI
preconditioners available in the literature. The key ingredient in this
work is to use the idea of the semi-implicit method for pressure-linked
equations (SIMPLE) for getting rid of the saddle point structure,
resulting in a standard FSI problem that can be treated with available
techniques. Even though the lung model is a complex multi-physics
problem (see Figure 10), the numerical examples show that the
resulting preconditioners approaches the optimal performance (see Figure 11).
Moreover, the preconditioners are
robust enough to deal with physiologically relevant simulations
involving complex real-world patient-specific lung geometries. The same
approach is applicable to other challenging biomedical applications
where coupling between flow and tissue deformation is modeled with
additional algebraic constraints. This work has lead to 1 paper in a Q1
journal (see reference [^verdugo_2016b]). In the framework of this
research, I have been junior co-PI in the Bavarian regional project
"Efficient solvers for coupled problems in respiratory mechanics".

@@im-100
![](/assets/fig16.png)

*Figure 11: Patient-specific lung example: Results of the strong scalability test.
The figure shows the dependence of the linear solver iterations with
respect to the number of processors (left), and the parallel speed up
(right).*
@@

## References

[^badia_2016] S. Badia, A.F. Mart√≠n, and J. Principe.  Multilevel Balancing Domain Decomposition at Extreme Scales. *SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing*, 38(1): C22--C52, 2016. \doi{10.1137/15M1013511}.

[^badia_2017] S. Badia and F. Verdugo. Robust and scalable domain decomposition solvers for unfitted finite element methods. *Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics*, 344: 740--759, 2018. \doi{10.1016/j.cam.2017.09.034}.

[^badia_2018a] S. Badia, F. Verdugo, and A.F. Mart√≠n. The aggregated unfitted finite element method for elliptic problems.  *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 336: 533--553, 2018. \doi{10.1016/j.cma.2018.03.022}.

[^badia_2018b] S. Badia, A.F. Mart√≠n, and F. Verdugo. Mixed Aggregated Finite Element Methods for the Unfitted Discretization of the Stokes Problem. *SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing*, 40(6): B1541--B1576, 2018. \doi{10.1137/18M1185624}.

[^badia_2019a] S. Badia, A.F. Mart√≠n, E. Neiva, and F. Verdugo.  A generic finite element framework on parallel tree-based adaptive meshes.  *SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing*, 42(6): C436--C468, 2020. \doi{10.1137/20M1328786}.

[^badia_2020] S. Badia and F. Verdugo. Gridap: An extensible Finite Element toolbox in Julia. *Journal of Open Source Software*, 5(52), 2020.  \doi{10.21105/joss.02520}.

[^badia_2021] S. Badia, A.F. Mart√≠n, E. Neiva, and F. Verdugo. The aggregated unfitted finite element method on parallel tree-based adaptive meshes. *SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing*,  43: C203--C234, 2021. \doi{10.1137/20M1344512}.

[^briggs_2000] W.L. Briggs, V.E. Henson, and S.F. McCormick. *A Multigrid Tutorial, Second Edition*. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2000. \doi{10.1137/1.9780898719505}.

[^burman_2015] E. Burman, S. Claus, P. Hansbo, M.G. Larson, and A. Massing. CutFEM: Discretizing Geometry and Partial Differential Equations. *International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering*, 104(7): 472--501, 2015. \doi{10.1002/nme.4823}.

[^cottrell_2009] J.A. Cottrell, T.J.R. Hughes, and Y.Bazilevs. *Isogeometric analysis: toward integration of CAD and FEA*. Wiley, 2009. \doi{10.1002/9780470749081.ch7}.

[^elman_2008] H. Elman, V.E. Howle, J. Shadid, R. Shuttleworth, and R. Tuminaro. A taxonomy and comparison of parallel block multi-level preconditioners for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. *Journal of Computational Physics*, 227(3): 1790--1808, 2008.  \doi{10.1016/j.jcp.2007.09.026}.

[^fang_2018] R. Fang, P. Farah, A. Popp, and W.A. Wall. A monolithic, mortar-based interface coupling and solution scheme for finite element simulations of lithium-ion cells. *International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering*, 114(13): 1411--1437, 2018. \doi{10.1002/nme.5792}.

[^felippa_2001] C.A. Felippa, K.C. Park, and C. Farhat. Partitioned analysis of coupled mechanical systems.  *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 190(24-25): 3247--3270, 2001. \doi{10.1016/S0045-7825(00)00391-1}.

[^forster_2007] C. F√∂rster, W.A. Wall, and E. Ramm. Artificial added mass instabilities in sequential staggered coupling of nonlinear structures and incompressible viscous flows.  *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 196(7): 1278--1293, 2007. \doi{10.1016/j.cma.2006.09.002}.

[^gee_2011] M.W. Gee, U. K√ºttler, and W.A. Wall.  Truly monolithic algebraic multigrid for fluid-structure interaction.  *International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering*, 85(8): 987--1016, 2011. \doi{10.1002/nme.3001}.

[^kremheller_2018] J. Kremheller, A.T. Vuong, L. Yoshihara, W.A. Wall, and B.A. Schrefler.  A monolithic multiphase porous medium framework for (a-)vascular tumor growth. *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 340: 657--683, 2018.  \doi{10.1016/j.cma.2018.06.009}.

[^tobin_2001] T. Martin.  Advances in mechanical ventilation. *The New England Journal of Medicine*, 344(26): 1986--1996, 2001. \doi{10.1056/NEJM200106283442606}.

[^toselli_2005] A. Toselli and O. B. Widlund. *Domain Decomposition Methods ‚Äî Algorithms and Theory*, volume 34 of *Springer Series in Computational Mathematics*. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. \doi{10.1007/b137868}.

[^verdugo_2016] F. Verdugo and W.A. Wall. Unified computational framework for the efficient solution of n-field coupled problems with monolithic schemes. *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 310: 335--366, 2016.  \doi{10.1016/j.cma.2016.07.016}.

[^verdugo_2016b] F. Verdugo, C.J. Roth, L. Yoshihara, and W.A. Wall. Efficient solvers for coupled models in respiratory mechanics. *International Journal for Numerical Methods in Biomedical Engineering*, 2016. \doi{10.1002/cnm.2795}.

[^verdugo_2019] F. Verdugo, A.F. Mart√≠n, and S. Badia.  Distributed-memory parallelization of the aggregated unfitted finite element method. *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering*, 357, 2019. \doi{10.1016/j.cma.2019.112583}.














